---
title: "Intro Page - The Distributive Property of Multiplication Over Addition"
date: 2025-05-19
---
<head>
	<script type="text/javascript" async 
	src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.1/MathJax.js?
	config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>
</head>
Hi, my name is Jenny and I'm a math tutor who's been trying recently to make some shifts to more permanent modes of math communication. Typically this is where I should try to tell you something interesting about myself, but I don't know what you would find interesting, so I'll have to wait until someone asks.

I made this page in particular as a test page to learn how GitHub Pages works, but I didn't want anyone to potentially leave empty-handed, so I thought I would populate it with a few basic algebra facts I had taught someone in a recent session, and it got... out of hand. It turns out that algebra facts lack natural predators in this environment, and they propogated further than I'd planned.

The Pandora's box in question for today is the distributive property of multiplication over addition, which if you're not familiar, says that for any three real numbers $$a, b,$$ and $$c,$$ it's always true that $$a \cdot (b + c) = ab + ac$$: for example, $$3 \cdot (3 + 2) = 3 \cdot 5 = 15,$$ and $$3 \cdot 3 + 3 \cdot 2 = 9 + 6 = 15.$$ This turns out to be a remarkably powerful fact, partially because it allows us to alter the order of operations that our dear aunt Sally set out for us, and partially because the fact that it works for all real value means we can use it even when we don't know what values we're working with - in other words, we can use it to manipulate expressions of variables.

If you're not familiar with why the distributive property should be true, imagine having $$a$$ boxes in front of you, and each one has $$b$$ apples and $$c$$ oranges. There are $$(b + c)$$ pieces of fruit in each box, so $$a$$ boxes with that many pieces of fruit each must have $$a \cdot (b + c)$$ total pieces of fruit. However, consider the numbers of apples and oranges separately: $$a$$ boxes with $$b$$ apples each would have a total of $$ab$$ apples, and similarly we should have $$ac$$ total oranges. So, if we add total apples and total oranges together to get total fruit, we get $$ab + ac.$$ Now, we have two expressions which each describe the same quantity, the total number of pieces of fruit, so they must be equal: $$a \cdot (b + c) = ab + ac.$$

(And to be clear, if you know that multiplication distributes over subtraction as well, meaning that $$a \cdot (b - c) = ab - ac$$ is also always true, that's just because subtraction is defined via addition in the real numbers: $$a - b$$ is defined as $$a + (-1) \cdot b$$. Also, $$(a + b) \cdot c = ac + bc$$ is another way to write this property, which is the same due to the commutative property of multiplication: $$ab = ba$$ for any real numbers $$a$$ and $$b$$.)

<details>
  <summary>(You can click here for some pedantry around the proof, if you wouldn't find it confusing.)</summary><br>
	<blockquote>
		Thank you for joining me. The eagle-eyed amongst you might notice that the example I presented specifically works for whole numbers a, b, and c since it relies on a whole-number-centric idea of what multiplication means, but a full proof of the property for all real numbers would be hard to present, mainly because there are differences in how the real numbers tend to be formally defined. One type of approach is "axiomatic," where properties like this one are defined from the outset, and we think of the resulting set of numbers as a consequence of those rules rather than the other way around. Those approaches include this property as fundamental, in part for the reason this demonstration provides: it's a fairly important property to the basic behavior of our elementary idea of multiplication.<br><br>
		That said, there are other approaches where we build the real numbers from sequences of rational numbers, and we build rational numbers from integers, and integers are built from these whole numbers we're discussing. That said, in that perspective, each step of that process preserves this property because of how each operation is defined for the new set of numbers based on the results of performing those operations on the old set. I've omitted a full proof in this spirit for the sake of time, but the point is that this example with the integers is more sufficient than it might immediately appear. 
	</blockquote>
</details>

Now part of what it means for this to be such a fundamental property is that it finds its way into a lot of very common operations, and we don't always explicitly mention when it's popping up. For instance:

- FOILing, the common process for multiplying binomials, is really just using the distributive property twice: $$(a+b)(c+d) = a(c+d) + b(c+d)$$ by the distibutive property, which equals $$ac + ad + bc + bd$$ if we distribute each of those products of $$a(c+d)$$ and $$b(c+d)$$. If we look at the four terms of that product, they follow the order of the <b>F</b>irst terms from each binomial, then the <b>O</b>utside terms, then the <b>I</b>nside terms, then the <b>L</b>ast terms, spelling out the acronym FOIL. (Although, due to the commutative property of addition, $$a + b = b + a$$, that order isn't really important as long as every pair is included.)
- "Combining like terms" is really just factoring out a common factor, which is also really just the distributive property, just in reverse: for instance, $$2x + 3x = (2 + 3)x = 5x$$: the reason this works is because if we had distributed out the $$(2 + 3)x$$ we would get back to the $$2x + 3x$$ where we started. In general, "factoring" is really just distributing in reverse, but since equations work in both directions, that still makes it a consequence of the distributive property.
- The way we were taught to multiply in grade school is reliant on the distributive property. As an example, take $$12 \cdot 5,$$ the elementary school way to multiply these would be to first multiply $$2$$ times $$5$$, getting $$10$$, then writing down the $$0$$ and carrying the $$1$$, then doing $$1 \cdot 5$$ and adding that carried $$1$$ to get a tens digit of $$6$$, for a final answer of $$60$$. What's actually happening under the hood is that we're taking advantage of the fact that $$12$$ really means $$10 + 2$$, so $$5 \cdot 12 = 5 \cdot (10 + 2) = 5 \cdot 10 + 5 \cdot 2$$. This lets us take care of multiplying one place value at a time, and the "carrying" just lets us handle when we've made groups of the next highest place value, letting us shortcut the addition at the end while we multiply.
- The distributive property is responsible for how signs in multiplication work: consider what happens if we distribute out the product $$2 \cdot (2 + (-2))$$. We know it equals $$2 \cdot 0 = 0$$, but it also equals $$2 \cdot 2 + 2 \cdot (-2)$$, which is $$4 + 2 \cdot (-2)$$. So, if $$4 + 2 \cdot (-2) = 0,$$ it must be true that $$2 \cdot (-2) = -4,$$ and generalizing this, we can see that one positive and one negative number will multiply to give a negative answer. Similarly, $$-2 \cdot (2 + (-2)) = -2 \cdot 2 + (-2) \cdot (-2) = 0,$$ so if $$-4 + (-2)(-2) = 0,$$ it must be true that $$(-2)(-2) = 4$$, and again this can be generalized to show that a negative number times a negative number gives a positive answer.
- One way to think about how fractions of the same denominator add is by thinking of them as distribution of division, and since division is defined by multiplication (dividing by $$2$$ is really defined as multiplying by $$\frac12$$) this is a direct result of the distributive property of multiplication. Saying $$\frac{a}{c} + \frac{b}{c} = \frac{a + b}{c}$$ can be translated directly to $$\frac1{c}(a + b) = \frac1{c}\cdot a + \frac1{c} \cdot b$$, which is just the distributive property.
- <details>
	<summary>One more if you know about exponent and logarithm rules.</summary>
	The exponent rule $$(ab)^n = a^n \cdot b^n$$ can be thought of as the distributive property of multiplication over addition: $$(ab)^n = (e^{\ln(ab)})^n = e^{n \cdot \ln(ab)} = e^{n \cdot (\ln(a) + \ln(b))}$$ and using the distributive property as the key step here, we get that this equals $$e^{n \ln(a) + n \ln(b)} = e^{n \ln(a)} \cdot e^{n \ln(b)} = (e^{\ln(a)})^n \cdot (e^{\ln(b)})^n = a^n \cdot b^n$$ as promised.</details>

Now one word of warning before we end off: the distributive property is a common enough tool that those of us who know of its power can sometimes forget its limits, and try to do distribution on other operations. And as some of the bullet points I just listed point out, there are some other operations that exhibit this sort of distributive behavior. That said, one of the <b>most common algebra mistakes</b> you can make involves distributing where it's not valid: in particular, trying to distribute exponents over addition, where $$(a + b)^2 \neq a^2 + b^2$$. This is a fallacy known as "The Freshman's Dream," because "The Freshman" in question wishes the two sides were equal: to see that they aren't, consider that if $$a = b = 1,$$ then $$(1 + 1)^2 \neq 1^2 + 1^2$$ because $$4 \neq 2$$. If we want to know what $$(a + b)^2$$ really is in terms of $$a$$ and $$b$$, we have to use our FOIL process from the bullet points: $$(a + b)^2$$ means $$(a + b)(a + b) = a(a + b) + b(a + b) = a^2 + ab + ba + b^2,$$ or $$a^2 + 2ab + b^2$$. That "mixed term" $$2ab$$ is what keeps "The Freshman's Dream" from becoming reality: this means that whenever both $$a$$ and $$b$$ are nonzero, the two sides will not be equal.

With that said, I'm up later than I'd intended, and I think I've said enough about the distributive property for one post. (I do not expect to return to the subject for a future post, but I also didn't expect to have <i>this</i> much to say, so who knows?)

If you've found this, I hope you found it in some way helpful or entertaining, and I hope you have a nice rest of your day.
