---
title: "Challenge Problem - Right Triangle Optimization"
date: 2025-05-20
---
<head>
	<script type="text/javascript" async 
	src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.1/MathJax.js?
	config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>
	<script async src="https://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/js/adsbygoogle.js?client=ca-pub-6742417150601345"
     crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
</head>
Hello, I hope you're doing well today. Making the distributive property post reminded me of a previous attempt I'd had to make a blog post about a math subject, in particular about a question a friend of mine asked me. Something I find special about the question is that it actually came up as a result of a practical problem he'd encountered while working as a busser at a restaurant, rather than just pure mathematical inquiry, and it ends up tugging at a lot of interesting threads from different fields of math.<br><br>

The question was: <blockquote>Given a certain length for the hypotenuse, which right triangle has the largest area?</blockquote>

and I solved it two different ways, once in a more analytical fashion (originally using calculus, but while writing this article I realized it can be made precalc-friendly) and then another time with more elementary high school geometry tools. If either of those are within your skillset, I would recommend trying to answer the question for yourself. It's pretty easy to get an educated guess on what the answer should be, but try to see if you can create a convincing mathematical argument for why that answer <i>has</i> to be correct: a high-quality proof should leave very little room for reasonable doubt.<br><br>

I'll give hints leading to my solutions if you feel like you're stuck, or if you'd just like to take a look, but don't feel like you have to stay exactly on the path I took to find my solutions: part of the reason why I wanted to present this problem is that it led me to two very different approaches, so I'm sure other very interesting methods exist which I didn't find, and I would love to hear them if you would like to share.

<details>
  <summary>
    Analytical method hints
  </summary>
  It might help to start by categorizing what <i>kind</i> of problem we're looking at. We want to know about maximizing the area of our triangle, so we can broadly categorize this as an optimization problem. (And if you'd like, since we have a constraint regarding the hypotenuse, this can specifically be thought of as constrained optimization.)<br>
  One way to handle an optimization problem like this is to start by finding a function which represents the value we're trying to minimize or maximize (called our "objective function") over all of the different choices we could make. This idea of getting the information we want by studying the properties of functions is what I meant when I called these approaches "analytical."<br>
  So, what other information about the triangle are we trying to determine? And how can we express the area in terms of that unknown information? At first, this seemed like an obvious choice to me, which led me to my calculus-based solution, which is what I'll put in my first set of hints, but like I mentioned before there is also a method that doesn't require calculus, if we make a slightly different choice. I'll put that in the second set of hints.
  <details>
    <summary>
      Calculus method setup hints
    </summary>
    Well, we know we have a right triangle with a specific hypotenuse, so something I find fairly natural is to try to proceed by defining the other two sides of the triangle: a triangle has three sides after all. So let's say that we can choose side lengths a and b for the two legs of our triangle.<br>
    Now, for any side lengths a and b that we have in a specific triangle, we can find the area using our typical formula for area of a triangle: $$A = \frac12(\text{base})\cdot(\text{height}) = \frac12 ab$$
    So, if our goal was just to maximize this area function, it might seem like there should be no maximum because we could just make a and b as large as we'd like. So, why can't we just make a and b arbitrarily large? That has to do with our constraint: there's a specific value of the hypotenuse that we need to keep constant. Let's call that c. As we know, the legs and the hypotenuse have to be related via the Pythagorean theorem:$$a^2 + b^2 = c^2$$
    So, now we have our objective function and a constraint function defined in terms of our unknowns a and b. From here, it's just a matter of technique. My original solution involves using multivariable calculus techniques, but there's also a way to proceed with single-variable calculus, so I'll also include that: feel free to check against either solution.
    <details>
      <summary>
        Multivariable calculus solution
      </summary>
      This solution uses a method known as the method of Lagrange multipliers, which I do intend to explain in further depth at some point if I end up making math content more regularly, but this post is already getting fairly long, so today isn't going to be the day. (I may come back and link an explanation if I make one later though.)<br>
      The bottom line is, we can take our objective function and our constraint function in terms of a and b, and state that their gradients (the vectors keeping track of the rates of change of the function) must be parallel, so that the objective function can't change instantaneously without also changing the constraint function, which we know has to be kept constant. This leads us to
      $$\nabla (\frac12 ab) = \lambda \nabla (a^2 + b^2) \Leftrightarrow <\frac12 b, \frac 12 a> = \lambda <2a, 2b>$$
      $$b = 4\lambda a, a = 4\lambda b \Rightarrow b = 16\lambda^2 b \Rightarrow b(16\lambda^2 - 1) = 0$$
      So, this leaves us with three options: b could be zero, but this doesn't really give us a triangle, we'd have zero area. That leaves us with the two possible values for the multiplier, but if that multiplier is negative then a and b can't both be positive, so it must be true that 
        $$\lambda = \frac14 \Rightarrow a = b$$
        so our answer is that the maximum area must be achieved by constructing the isosceles right triangle.
    </details>
    <details>
      <summary>
        Single-variable calculus solution
      </summary>
      To solve a problem like this with single-variable calculus, we need to solve the constraint equation for one of our variables, so that we can put our objective function in terms of one variable. So, keeping in mind that our side lengths have to be positive, notice that
      $$a^2$$
    </details>
  </details>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>
    Geometry method hints
  </summary>
</details>
